Arizona State University
     Herberger Institute of Design and the Arts

Manifesto of Awakening

A manifesto on finding your way through the world as an aspiring artist



website link - Awakening

Mohammed Zaabi Noor

GRA 561 Methods in Visual Communication
Professor Danielle Foushee

Art is neither a luxury nor an embellishment of civilization; rather, it is an essential part of the human experience. I think it's a necessary thing to do. It is one of the primary goals of human culture.

Keep reminding yourself that your life can be transformed by the power of creativity.

Greetings to you, my fellow dreamer, my striving artist, my beloved reader. When do you start to notice what's going on around you? It was as if the world had become more deadly as your knowledge of it grew. There was a lot of personal experience and choices that lead you to this point in time when you are torn between wanting to give the world you once knew a second opportunity and not. That opportunity and change can only be given by us as designers, as artists, as believers, and as peacekeepers. Modern-day shamans, artists are the last line of defense against authoritarian tyranny. They express their ideas to the public via art. Guardians of my small rays of light forever. The artist's connection to the source rejects what is bad inside the human soul. Even though all other lights have gone out, the artist steadfastly holds on to his torch of truth despite the gloom. Don't be afraid to put your faith in the fundamental worth of doing what you love, even if it's difficult at times. Take a step back and accept the process in a world of instant gratification and performance pressure. Make use of what you've learned from your new creative endeavor in other aspects of your life. Apply it.

In the face of frustration and disappointment, have you been able to maintain your composure? Allow others to do the same. How much more patient with yourself have you been because of learning something new, such as cello or painting? Incorporate this into your everyday routine. Have your artistic endeavors helped you discover a new level of happiness within yourself? Make sure to spread the joy with your loved ones. It's been a long time since you've felt grounded in your body. Thank your body for enabling you to participate in this event. We may fully experience the joyful and therapeutic consequences of being creative if we shift our emphasis away from the finished result and back to the process.  Whatever the purpose for your creative endeavor, whether it be for a second profession, to bring more joy into your life, to reinvent yourself, or to express various parts of yourself, keep conscious of what elements of the process you love and what the process provides you.

We need to stop promoting the notion that creativity diminishes with age.

If the pendulum swings and signals degrade, a new message is required to replace the old one's inertness, the artist's visions are what define an era. It is imperative that a fresh strategy be conceived with enough emotional impetus to launch an incipient vision into existence and propel us out of the gravitational pull of frozen ideology. You may see the world from an entirely new viewpoint through art, and it's this shift in perspective, coupled with the artist's conscious awareness tuned into a specific vibratory frequency that shakes apart inertia, devastates and illuminates broken institutions, and inspires new ideas.

Artistic creativity is fueled by the ability to deduce, feel, and empathize with a wide range of emotional states. To be a true artist, you must live in a world that is both open and private, esoteric, and pure. In a semi-lucid state of alchemical flow, high-level conscious interfaces interpret and connect meta understandings together, consolidating a vast range of ideas into an aesthetically beautiful simplicity.

It is the artist's choice of medium that sets the stage for an array of mental copulations that attract and repel each other, resulting in an array of mental copulations that set the stage for an array of mental copulations that attract and repel each other. An unblinking mosaic of thoughts and concepts is fused together until a cohesive mind construct that consists of many things but is also unique is born.

There has been an absence of an incubation time that would have allowed a more complete work to emerge. This is not a new problem for Western society, but the pace has sped up significantly because of the overcrowded smart phone era; hence, much of what we receive are fragments of hastily churned out notions or minimally altered retellings of better-told tales.

There is rarely a moment of isolation if one follows the prescribed road put forth by parents, instructors, and institutions. There's never a chance to clear your head and think clearly. There will never be a time when an idea can mature, and minds will never be able to think and clear themselves of the ego's lies that cloud the field of vision.

In today's hyper-competitive capitalist society, arrogance is praised as a good sense of extroversion and aggressiveness. The Dunning-Kruger effect is at work here, with trophies, prizes, honors, degrees, and the panoply of compliments to inflate plutocrats. All the self-serving haughtiness espoused by capitalist culture is out of date and only serves to inflate egos rather than calm them down. To those who seek the transient pleasure of worldly gain, the egotistical parade of it's all about me-ism may appeal, but it is death to art and harms us all.

In a fast-paced world, artistic messages are hindered both when they are being created and when they are being absorbed. The artist's most effective weapon is vision, and the narrower and more constrained the waking awareness, the more limited the creative effort will be. A terrified panicked mind that needs to pay the bills cannot see beyond itself. Audiences, on the other hand, are unable to comprehend a work of art when they are distracted by their daily concerns and are unable to fully immerse themselves in it. People will continue to plunge into increasingly basic thought patterns as capitalists continue to modify art to sell to ever more crowded brains, resulting in an ever-decreasing circle of dumbed-down, hurried art, which is then only partially understood by today's cluttered minds. Symbolically, this cycle depicts the gradual demise of rationality, wisdom, and spirituality, all of which are slowly suffocated by greed.

Remove any notions of excess or deficit from your mind, don’t let them define you.

Before all journeys commence, such as this one, we must reflect on where we stand, our personal goals, our journeys, our dreams, what did it take for us to get here? How many odds did you overcome that may have diminished with memory, how powerful do you feel at this stage in your life to be able to speak to the world through your visual prowess? are you the soul that guided itself or held the torch for others as a beacon?

Chapter 1 – The Torch

The torch represents my spark; despite all odds, we all had that starting point; it may have been the most amazing idea that began with nothing more than a scribbling on the back of an old notebook, an idea that you crumpled up and put away, never to look back at it again. What if, regardless of age, it was the only pure vision the world needed to be aware of? Were you surrounded by folks who congratulated you on what you did? Or, as the saying goes, "an idle mind is the devil's factory." Exposure to negativity at an early age leads to the belief that this is the way of the world and how it operates. Your birth determines your future. In my area of the globe, you are hailed as a doctor, engineer, or IT professional from the minute you are born. I thought that's what I wanted to be because that's all I thought mattered. The media bolstered these views by depicting day and night the great exploits and triumphs attained by engaging in these professions; you practically win at life, they asserted. There I was, staring at my unsharpened pencil and crumpled up paper, wondering if these few written sentences had the capacity to gain the world's admiration. What if I wanted to be different? It couldn't be that this is what everyone is meant for. Personally, there was always a dark figure towering over my creative dreams; the figure symbolized expectations, expectations to live in accordance with what others wanted, societal expectations. You may have arrived on the life spectrum where you were certain of what you wanted to be, and then there's the spectrum where you're holding on to the slightest piece of thought, the invisible silver thread, just maybe, just maybe I'm supposed to be this visionary in my own way. But these were merely the folly of an immature intellect, and I had no choice but to reject them and be drawn into the blackhole of becoming what was advertised. I was conscious, but it was drowned out by the white noise of the world; little did I realize that my future would be filled with upheaval until I was eventually satisfied with where I was.

Chapter 2- The Bonfire

Thank you for sticking with me at this stage of the journey, perhaps we share in something in common, this is the point where we gather and reflect our thoughts, the bonfire has its own special significance, it provides you with heat and comfort in the coldest of nights, it attracts from far away and catches the attention of any likeminded wandering souls or perhaps some just seeking refuge from the harsh environment. But it is a place of rest where no one is judged, all are equal in the eyes of the flame. Now I ask you the question as we all sit here, what is your archetype in this journey? Are you the do-er, dreamer, or believer? *insert* they say it is important to identify who are you before you carry on in this journey of finding yourself. We believe in the concept of being led and then further to lead others once we grasp the gravity of leadership, it is the experiences of others that we read about and understand; such is the concept of phenomenology devised by Edmund Husserl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 3 – The Journey

I've deduced that everything worthwhile requires stepping outside of your comfort zone. Establishing new relationships or ending old ones, starting a new business, or acquiring a new skill are all possibilities. That everything comes to those who work hard and spend time doing difficult tasks. Another problem is that they aren't necessary. You'll be OK if you stay in your comfort zone. All's fine, but that's about it. By becoming someone who likes pain, you can go from 'just OK' to 'well,' all on your own. A person who takes great pleasure in it. When it occurs, you get a steady stream of the reward you're seeking, which keeps you going until the end. One of the most significant changes in my life was realizing the importance of discomfort and putting in the effort to become someone who enjoys working in that environment. In business, the capacity to remain uncomfortable, often known as 'grit,' is a major component in achieving great success. Journeys are always the hardest bit, when you have finally set out in the unknown with nothing but a small bundle of hope on your back and the ragged scarf of motivation shielding you from the harsh winds. You feel exposed and vulnerable because of the sheer vastness of the task you have undertaken, you dared to be different, you dared to dream. I would like to think of this manifesto as a sequential experience. Everyone who reads this piece will follow the same predetermined sequence of a beginning, middle, and end. Over the course of the timeline, we see an individual’s journey and tale end. This concept has been central to the manifesto’s conception and development since its inception. Regardless of the message, all of this is dictated by the medium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 4 – The Oasis

During all journeys you are faced with many challenges and stops, the oasis seemingly beautiful but treacherous, what you once thought was beautiful turned out to be non- existent as you got closer to it,  the world in this case run by the spectacle, this was when I realized what was truly at stake, what it meant to be an artist, to view the world with a third eye, how overwhelming was this realization that it made you want to go back to being oblivious ?

“The reigning economic system is a vicious circle of isolation. Its technologies are based on isolation, and they contribute to that same isolation. From automobiles to television, the goods that the spectacular system chooses to produce also serve it as weapons for constantly reinforcing the conditions that engender “lonely crowds.”

― Guy Debord, The Society of the Spectacle

“The conscious and intelligent manipulation of the organized habits and opinions of the masses is an important element in democratic society. Those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling power of our country. We are governed, our minds are molded, our tastes formed, our ideas suggested, largely by men we have never heard of. This is a logical result of the way in which our democratic society is organized. Vast numbers of human beings must cooperate in this manner if they are to live together as a smoothly functioning society.”
― Edward Bernays, Propaganda

Guy Debord's "Society of the Spectacle" contends that alienation is a result of modern society's economic, political, and cultural conditions. While many people's working conditions improved after WWII, alienation did not disappear. Rather, it spread from the workplace to the marketplace and is now manifesting as a social order in which everyone is driven to spend their lives in accordance with production cycles rather than living for themselves. We are constantly overwhelmed with images of empire and capital. It is persistent. Our thoughts have evolved into both a marketplace and a commodity that can be exchanged. And it's a profitable industry, with Facebook and Google as good examples. Their data collecting and surveillance exemplify the marriage of the state and the capitalist economy, and they have carved out devious new areas in the human brain to coerce self-censorship and compliance to the dominant consumerist global order. We are continually inundated with pictures of those who have attained fame and riches in the modern world. We are taught that if we want to look like them, we must purchase their things. This social conditioning is a process that necessitates widespread acceptance. Edward Bernays, the famed business publicist and renowned "father of public relations," realized this. Manipulation of the multiple strata of the human psyche takes time, especially when dealing with vast populations of people. However, history is littered with sad examples of powerful interests successfully implementing it. Today, those interests are squarely with capital and empire; but the repercussions remain the same: diversion, censorship, alienation, coerced, compliance with status quo customs, and the numbing of our thought process.

This might lead us to believe that our social standing is unimportant, because it is not about being a worker or anything else—it is about getting famous and affluent. As a result, to avoid alienation from society, we must all understand what is truly important in life: our individual social positions within society.     
Unplugging from any of this is not easy, nor is it always virtuous, but there are methods to withdraw from its social influence, both personally and collectively. There are also methods of using it that challenge its prevailing algorithms. One of these methods is détournement, which translates as rerouting or hijacking in French. This involves reversing the imagery or messages of capital and empire to demonstrate and even magnify their deception. It has a long history of successfully altering the dominant narrative to reflect reality.

All of this is not to suggest that technology or social media are intrinsically bad; rather, it is to acknowledge that much of it has become a vehicle for a poisonous authoritarianism. And its danger resides in the deception of its seemingly harmless look. Whether it's Google Maps or one of the numerous other "useful" applications we use every day, surveillance capital becomes a method of regulating behaviour, transactions, and choices, as well as identifying which members of society pose a threat to the order. In other words, conformity is heavily emphasized, while any kind of opposition is considered extremely objectionable.

Chapter 5 – The Stray Path

The perfect example of the stray path can be tied back to the many interpretations of the poem by Robert Frost’s “The road not taken”

The stray path throws our journey into a bind. There are two roads presented, probably because of the one road splitting, and there is nothing to do except select one of the roads and continue life's journey.

The core theme is that we are frequently confronted with options in life. When choosing a choice, one must make a decision. When we consider an option as a fork in the road, it becomes evident that we must select one or the other, but not both.

Frost did not say if the path he picked was the right one in "The Road Not Taken." Regardless, that is where he is now, and where he ends up, for better or worse, is the product of his decision.

This poem is not about traveling the route less traveled, about originality, or about being one-of-a-kind. To be clear, this poem is about the path taken as well as the road not taken, not always the road less traveled. Anyone who has made a significant decision would agree that it is human nature to wonder, "What if..." had you taken the option you did not make. The fundamental theme of the stray path is considering the alternative life one may have had if they had done something differently.

The speaker chooses the other route at random and proclaims himself glad once there since it has more grass and not many people have gone down it. In any case, he could always go back and attempt the 'original' path again. Is it a possibility? Perhaps not since life has a way of making one thing lead to another until going backwards is no longer an option.

But who knows what the future will bring? The speaker indicates that when he gets older, he will reflect on this pivotal moment in his life, the morning he chose the path less traveled, because adopting that route profoundly transformed his way of being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 6 – The Weary Traveler

Knowledge can be overwhelming, at this stage in life, many factors can wear you down, the weight of wanting to prove yourself and the weight of being able to make a difference in this world. It makes you question yourself if all the effort is truly worth it, the scary thought that the summit will be filled with more obstacles making the entire journey worthless. You always look back and see the reason why you started in the first place. You chose to escape something, its clutches can reach far and wide and still have its influence over you, the shadowy figure looming over you when you held the torch is still watching you from the distance, this time further away but waiting for you to make that same mistake. The mistake of wanting you to pursue your dreams. When you keep going, you will get stronger. You will be able to withstand whatever life decides to throw at you. You will take on the kind of soft skills where other people will look at you and wonder how you’re doing it. The longer you keep going the stronger your determination to complete the project. It is about the journey and not just the destination, and we all understand that on an intellectual level; however, the grandest truth is that it is about both. The journey is for the enjoyment, but the destination is for the lessons

Chapter 7 – The Final Ascent

After having almost given up, when all seemed lost, there it was. The end was in sight, on the top of the mountain was a bright shining beacon, was it a haven to finally put all of this to rest? Or was it perhaps somebody else paving the way for me, another being who already made it through the path I was dreading to go on, that gave me hope. It was too late to turn around, the decisions that set this entire journey in motion rest on mantle of your willpower to not give up. You set out to be that creative person against all odds, you chose your happiness over money, you chose passion over expectations. Having truly learned the wicked ways of the world are you going to finally learn to live with it or succumb to its rules. There is too much within you that needs to be expressed, the flame is now burning brighter than ever. The flame has been your companion all this while, you set out with it, and you nurtured it with experiences. Rise, above all odds. Prove yourself, you are finally going to be that visionary you set out to be. Be Uniquely You.

Your best asset in this world is being who you are, authentic and free from any outside constraints.

In your mind, you can be that person, and it will spill over onto the rest of the world. It’s not important how long or arduous your journey to self-love — all that matters is that you get there.

Before you begin with discipline, I hope you can begin to conquer yourself. Because self-control and willpower are better guided by a positive mindset, not a negative one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 8 – Enlightenment

This is the stage where we all hope to be, this was where I realized I was the magician, the magician is wise, thoughtful, reflective, healing, contemplative, and transformative. This ties back to everything I experienced over our journey. The obstacles were never really meant to stop me or you from progressing, they were meant for us to learn and grow, overcome, and adapt. A new outlook and clarity with the universe on our side, ready to take on challenges and make a difference in this world with the biggest non-lethal weapon we possess - our artistic and creative mind. Having now joined the ranks of the shamans that carry the light, know that we are the backbone and framework of the fundamentals of the world just like the fundamentals in the field of design.  And as I write this personal manifesto, I feel more in control of my surroundings, completely aware of my existence and thoughts, does any of this make me feel powerless? Absolutely not. I feel what started as a spark has now ignited into a fully-fledged flame that cannot be extinguished, it is only capable of lighting the torch for others around me in hopes that we continue this tradition for everyone around us.  This is who I am, this is what my journey has made me, I hope that my personal experiences have guided you towards who you want to become, if you have resonated with my journey, then this is just the beginning.

References –

[ListParagraph] Censorship, I. O. (2017, October 19). Jodie Ginsberg: Art And Authoritarianism. Index on Censorship. https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2017/10/jodie-ginsberg-art-authoritarianism/.

[ListParagraph] What Is Capitalism Doing To Art? - Concrete. (2018, January 16). Concrete. https://www.concrete-online.co.uk/what-is-capitalism-doing-to-art/.

[ListParagraph] Neubauer, B. E., Witkop, C. T., & Varpio, L. (2019, April 5). How Phenomenology Can Help Us Learn From the Experiences Of Others - Perspectives On Medical Education. SpringerLink. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40037-019-0509-2.

[ListParagraph] "Phenomenology". (n.d.). "Phenomenology". https://www.brown.edu/Departments/Joukowsky_Institute/courses/architecturebodyperformance/1065.html.

[ListParagraph] Artistic Expression - Routledge Encyclopedia Of Philosophy. (n.d.). Artistic expression - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/artistic-expression/v-1?__cf_chl_captcha_tk__=g8LV4jNjoMDKCuY_5O4MDP4VQcQz5SjUZBZ75uamxbI-1639178227-0-gaNycGzNB6U.

[ListParagraph] Dunning-Kruger Effect: Why Incompetent People Think They Are Superior. (2021, August 6). Verywell Mind. https://www.verywellmind.com/an-overview-of-the-dunning-kruger-effect-4160740.

[ListParagraph] Untangling Art's Relationship With Capitalism - Pluto Press. (2017, May 10). Pluto Press. https://www.plutobooks.com/blog/art-and-capitalism/.

[ListParagraph] Three Ways Capitalism Impacts the Insider Art World. (2019, December 11). kdoutsiderart. https://kdoutsiderart.com/2019/12/11/three-ways-capitalism-impacts-the-insider-art-world/.

[ListParagraph] "Medium Is the Message" - DigitalRhetoricCollaborative. (n.d.). "Medium is the Message" - DigitalRhetoricCollaborative. http://webservices.itcs.umich.edu/mediawiki/DigitalRhetoricCollaborative/index.php/%22Medium_is_the_Message%22.

[ListParagraph] Society Of the Spectacle. (n.d.). Society of the Spectacle. https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/debord/society.htm.

[ListParagraph] Eferighe, J., & S. (2017, April 11). Why Conquering Yourself Is The First Step To Conquering The World. The Social Man. https://thesocialman.com/conquering-yourself-world/.

[ListParagraph] Neill, C. (2018, April 21). Understanding Personality: The 12 Jungian Archetypes. Moving People to Action. https://conorneill.com/2018/04/21/understanding-personality-the-12-jungian-archetypes/

